Orr, T.R., Zoeller, M.H., Patrick, M.R, and DeSmither, L.G., 2017, GIS shapefiles for
Kilauea's episode 61g lava flow, Puu Oo eruption: May 2016 to May 2017: U.S. Geological Survey
data release, https://doi.org/10.5066/F7DN43XR.

This dataset contains shapefiles and associated metadata for Kilauea volcano's Puu Oo episode
61g lava flow from May 24, 2016 through May 31, 2017. Episode 61g began with a breakout from
the east flank of Puu Oo on May 24, 2016. Lava reached the Pacific Ocean at Kamokuna on July
26, 2017, and began building a lava delta that extended seaward from the original coastline.
This lava delta collapsed into the ocean on December 31, 2016, as reflected in the data for
January 12, 2017 and thereafter. The episode 61g lava flow continues as of May 31, 2017, the
date of the last mapping to contribute to this dataset.

One mapping date is included for each calendar month - usually late in the month - from May
2016 through May 2017, with two exceptions: two mapping dates are included for June 2016 to
demonstrate the early expansion of the lava flow, and no mapping data were available for
April 2017, so data from May 3, 2017 are included instead. Two shapefiles are associated with
each mapping date: a polyline shapefile for the lava flow contacts with their attributes, and
a polygon shapefile for the full extent of the lava flow on that date. In total, this dataset
contains 28 shapefiles with associated metadata for 14 separate mapping dates. The lava flow
contacts were mapped on the ground using GPS or digitized from images collected by a variety
of aerial and satellite sources; the metadata include detailed descriptions of these sources.

The authors would like to thank Tina Neal (USGS-HVO) for her steadfast support in bringing
this data to publication, Steve Brantley (USGS-HVO) for his oversight of field operations,
Frank Trusdell (USGS-HVO) for providing example metadata, Joe Bard (USGS-CVO) and Joel
Robinson (USGS-VSC) for reviewing the shapefiles and metadata, Gary Fisher and other USGS
staff in Reston, VA for their analysis of remote sensing data, and numerous field assistants
for their tireless help in collecting GPS data for the lava flow.